# Getting Involved Early

A while back I read a [great article](https://blog.prototypr.io/the-messy-shift-to-starting-together-61088323b896) that 
outlines both the challenges and advantages of getting all necessary parties (at least that you know of) involved in a 
project early; this includes developers and engineers and other “tech” people.  The content resonated with me due to the 
fact that my team was in the midst of this exact transformation; we had started to inject ourselves into the “initiation” 
phase of projects.

When we say “initiation” of a project we are talking about discovery of risks, project goals, ROI, scope, etc..  What 
initiation is not is strict requirements gathering,  Once we move into actually executing on the project we follow our 
agile mindset to build an initial backlog and continually adjust as we learn about the project’s needs.  

A central item in the initiation is the identification of project outcomes and how to measure them.  This has proven to be 
a VERY difficult item to develop.  In the first attempt at gathering this information you usually end up with “fluffy” 
outcomes and measures, things that are more feel than actual measurable items.  We spend a fair amount of time on these 
items trying to get team members to think in a more absolute manner about measurable outcomes. 

A trick that I have employed with myself is to think about having to give a debrief after the project is complete to someone 
who may have not been involved in the day-to-day details of the project, maybe someone like the CEO of the company who is 
interested in the outcome but certainly wouldn’t be there day-to-day.  If I want to impress them I want to have measures 
that I can point to that say I clearly moved some needle from point a to point b.  

Once you identify outcomes you have a nice estimate of your return.  The next thing would be to estimate the investment, 
this isn’t terribly difficult if you keep in mind that it is an estimate and it will change.  In the end, the key thing to 
remember here is that EVERYONE is involved and has contributed.  If, once the team moves into executing the actual project 
work, something is discovered that changes any of these items (new risk, scope change, etc.) then ANYONE on the team is 
armed with the knowledge that should allow them to pull the andon cord and have the team stop and evaluate the situation.  

The last project that we worked where we were not involved early did eventually end up as a success, but it started out with 
a good amount of waste.  There were some technical folks involved early during the initiation of the project, but they were 
not the engineers that were going to be developing the solution.  Some spikes were done and a number of decisions were made, 
when we came onto the project we spent a lot of time re-running some of the spikes and trying to understand the decisions 
that were made, we lacked context and had to spend around 2 weeks rebuilding that context and shaping the proposed solution 
as we saw fit.   

Sometimes getting involved early in a project results in less work than we might have thought.  In one case we were involved 
early and gathered all of the necessary initiation items, senior leadership reviewed the outcomes that were identified and 
realized that there were more important efforts that needed to be worked before the one at hand.  Some might think this is a 
bad thing, it was actually great for us, because of our due diligence we didn’t spend time on work that wasn’t the next most 
important thing!  

In another case as we moved to the end of initiation of a project and into the execution phase it became very apparent that 
our involvement at that time was not needed.  Due to the fact we had all of the context we were able to make a quick and 
informed decision to step away from the project, the inverse of that would have been us spending time to gain the context 
that everyone else had already learned only to realize that our involvement wasn’t necessary (at least at that moment, in 
this case there was a small amount of deferred scope to be picked up at a later date, but we knew that because of the 
context we already had).  A key takeaway from this last example is that you should always be willing to speak up if 
something doesn’t feel right. On this last example had we not done that we may have stuck around on this project just 
because we were assigned to it, instead we raised our hands and made ourselves available for work that we could be a more 
valuable part of.

When we get involved early the things we learn, which are mostly non-technical, become invaluable.  The rapport and 
vernacular that is shared from the very beginning lives throughout the project and makes having hard discussions and making 
hard decisions about the eventual solution much easier.  In the early stages of a project we learn how everyone works, we 
learn how to adjust, we learn how to be a team.  Something I have learned is that context is a very powerful thing; the 
context you gain by getting involved early will be long lived and understood by everyone from the beginning to the end of 
the project (and hopefully beyond).  

As developers and engineers, by nature we tend to want to dive in and start solving the problem, all of this discovery and 
discussions and meetings are boring.  Trying to get enough people together to have proper discussions and make the right 
decisions can be frustrating.  Don’t let this scare you, don’t be afraid to get involved early, I don’t think you will 
regret it. 
